NIP-104: Double Ratchet (End-to-End Encrypted) DMs (#1206)
nostr-protocol/nips: 104.md

Let's look at an overview of the steps at the most abstract level. This initial discussion skips over many of the low-level cryptographic details. Go read the two articles linked above and check out the working demo app available on [Github](https://github.com/erskingardner/drdm-demo) for more detail.

1. Alice wants to have a private conversation with Bob. Her client sends an encrypted "conversation request" to Bob. To encrypt this first event, Alice's client creates a shared root key from a combination of Alice and Bob's Nostr keys, an ephemeral Nostr key pair, and a signed pre-key, which is a replaceable event found on Bob's Nostr relays. Because of the way the Diffie-Hellman exchange works, this process also authenticates Alice's identity to Bob. This conversation request event is [NIP-59 gift-wrapped](https://github.com/nostr-protocol/nips/blob/master/59.md) in order to hide as much metadata as possible. This conversation request event (`kind: 443`) is put inside the gift-wrap Seal event. This is a version of the X3DH key agreement protocol.

> 2. Alice has now given Bob enough information that, when he comes online, his client will see the conversation request and can authenticate that it is indeed from Alice (or, at least, someone who controls Alice's private key). It will then show Bob the conversation request. If he decides to accept this conversation request his client will then, using the shared root key he will also calculate via X3DH, fetch new message events (`kind: 444`), derive the keys needed to decrypt those messages, and decrypt the messages that Alice has sent. Importantly, Alice DOES NOT have to wait for Bob to accept this conversation request before she can start sending messages to him. Her conversation request event plus the tags included in her message events give Bob all the information needed (e.g. the ephemeral public key used to ratchet the shared root key + additional data) in order to derive the keys needed to decrypt her messages and continue the ratchet process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Alice has now given Bob enough information that, when he comes online, his client will see the conversation request and can authenticate that it is indeed from Alice (or, at least, someone who controls Alice's private key). It will then show Bob the conversation request. If he decides to accept this conversation request his client will then, using the shared root key he calculated via X3DH, fetch new message events (`kind: 444`), derive the keys needed to decrypt those messages, and decrypt the messages that Alice has sent. Importantly, Alice DOES NOT have to wait for Bob to accept this conversation request before she can start sending messages to him. Her conversation request event plus the tags included in her message events give Bob all the information needed (e.g. the ephemeral public key used to ratchet the shared root key + additional data) in order to derive the keys needed to decrypt her messages and continue the ratchet process.
```

3. The ratchet process continues in line with the [Signal Double Ratchet](https://www.signal.org/docs/specifications/doubleratchet) algorithm. It's important to note that the keys involved here are all symmetrical derived keys that are deleted as the conversation progresses. This includes a mechanism that allows for processing messages that arrive out of order or don't arrive at all.

## Details

### X3DH Key Exchange

For Alice to start a conversation with Bob, we need to have 4 sets of keys.

1. Alice's Nostr keypair (npub/nsec)
1. Alice's Ephemeral keypair (one created just for this initial conversation request)
1. Bob's Nostr keypair (npub/nsec)
1. Bob's Prekey keypair (Published in a `kind:10443` event)

By using a combination of these keys we create a shared secret key that also authenticates that Alice is who she says she is. The prekey (which should be rotated regularly) and ephemeral key (one-time use) provides some degree of replay attck protection.

The shared secret key that is output from this combination of Diffie-Hellman calculations becomes the initial root key (described below) from which all other keys are derived.

### KDF Chains

> The double ratchet algorithm used here depends on KDF (key derivation function) chains. If you're not familiar with what those are, the Signal docs have a great [description of KDF chains](https://www.signal.org/docs/specifications/doubleratchet/#kdf-chains), you should read it before moving on.

Reviewer: Consider adding a tldr?

NB: Both the Diffie-Hellman ratchet and the sending/receiving chain ratchet use symmetric encryption, not asymmetric encryption. This is for very good reasons but is different from how most encryption so far on Nostr has been done (via asymmetric encryption).

### Three Chains

This algorithm depends on keeping 3 KDF chains in sync between the two parties. Each chain's latest output key is used to derive other values.

1. Root Chain Key (RK)
2. Sending Chain Key (CKs)
3. Receiving Chain Key (CKr)

#### Root Chain Key (Diffie-Hellman Ratchet)

> The initial key for the root chain is calculated based on the X3DH key exchange described above. From that point onwards, each time the DH Ratchet is turned, a new RK and a new CKs or CKr is output. This ratchet provides post-compromise security. In other words, if an attacker gets steals one participant's CKs and CKr, they can calculate all future message keys and encrypt/decrypt future messages. Ratching the root chain breaks this by creating a new RK and a new key for each sending participant's sending and receiving chains. This ratchet is turned twice each time the active participant changes. For example, if Alice sends 1 message, Bob then sends 3, and Alice sends 1 more, each participant will have performed the DH ratchet 6 times. Twice for each change in sender so that we can calculate a new CKs and CKr.

Reviewer: Define RK, CKs, CKr

### Conversation Request Event

This event is sent when one user wants to start a conversation with another user. For example, if Alice wants to talk to Bob, her first message will be a conversation request event. This message allows both parties to establish a shared root key via a Diffie-Hellman key exchange and allows Alice to derive the first key in the chain to encrypt a message. An encrypted message MUST be included in the conversation request event to ensure that the first ratchet step is performed. The message can be a default message like, "Hi, I would like to connect." if no message is provided by the user.

```json
{
    "kind": 443,
    "created_at": <unix timestamp in seconds>,
    "pubkey": <pubkey of the sender>,
    "content": <ciphertext of initial message symmetrically encyrpted using first sending chain/message key>,
    "tags": [
        ["p", <pubkey of the recipient>],

>         ["prekey", <pubkey of the recipient prekey used for DH calculation>],

Reviewer 2: Change the tag to `recipient_prekey` to make it more clear?

        ["ephemeral", <pubkey of the ephemeral key used for DH calculation>]
    ],
    "sig": "" // No signature because these are only sent inside gift wraps.
}
```

### Double Ratchet Direct Message (DRDM) Event

The Double Ratchet Direct Message (DRDM) event is the main event kind that carries the conversation content. This event carries enough information for recievers to properly double ratchet their chains and decrypt the message content with the right symmetrical keys.

```json
{
    "kind": 444,
    "created_at": <unix timestamp in seconds>,
    "pubkey": <pubkey of the sender>,
    "content": <ciphertext of the message symmetrically encrypted with chain/message key>,
    "tags": [
        ["p", <pubkey of the recipient>],
        ["dh_sending", <current DH sending pubkey>],
        ["current_index", <number of current message in the current message chain>],

>         ["previous_length", <length of previous message chain>]

Reviewer 2: When sharing the key between clients/devices, do we also need to share the current rachet state (`current_index`, `previous_length`? Or should a new client start from 0?

Author: This DOES NOT work out of the box on multiple clients or devices. Each client/device combo should be thought of as a different "inbox" that will have it's own initial setup and will maintain it's own set of chains/keys for each conversation with another person. At a very high level, say I have Primal on iOS and Amethyst on Android and you have just Amethyst on Android. You're client would have to know that it's having the same conversation with two device-clients but using different sets of keys/chains. It would encrypt each message you send for each recipient and then publish those GW events separately.

Author: This is similar to how this sort of scheme works for group conversations as well.

Author: @staab @paulmillr high level description of multiple devices question here... ☝️  

you can also read more about how signal does it here: https://www.signal.org/docs/specifications/sesame/

I want to read up a bit more before committing to any path here. In an ideal world we have multi-device conversations, it's significantly more complex for clients. From the beginning I viewed this more as a solution that a dedicated secure messaging client would be using, and less as the normal standard for DMs in social clients. That said, nothing stopping those clients from implementing it, just a question of making the UI good enough.

Reviewer 2: If that is the case, then I would add a: 

Clients MUST not re-use/re-import keys from other clients or devices. The Key is not supposed to leave the app/device it was created from.

Author: I agree. I need to make this whole device/client limitation more clear in the NIP.

    ],
    "sig": "" // No signature because these are only sent inside gift wraps.
}
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Clients MUST check if the `pubkey` of kind `443` and `444` is the same as the Seal's, kind `13`, pubkey. Otherwise, impersonators can impersonate. :)

Clients can use any other standard tags they like, for example, `"a"` or `"e"` tags to reference previous messages.

### Prekey Event

The Prekey event is a simple replaceable event where a user publishes their signed prekey that is required to initiate the Diffie-Hellman key exchange to create a conversation request event. Including a signature on this event proves that the holder of the user's main nostr key (which signs the `kind: 10443` event) also has control of the private key associated with the prekey.

In most cases, clients that implement this NIP will manage the creation and rotation of this key on a regular basis. It's recommended that clients do so interactively with user consent in order to avoid overwriting prekeys created by other clients. It is also recommended that clients rotate this key on a regular basis.

```json
{
    "kind": 10443,
    "created_at": <unix timestamp in seconds>,
    "pubkey": <pubkey>,
    "content": <hex encoded pubkey of the prekey>,
    "tags": [
        ["prekey_sig", <signature generated from hex encoded pubkey of the prekey>]
    ],
    "sig": <signed normally with the user's main nostr pubkey>
}
```

> The `"prekey_sig"` tag value is a Schnorr signature of the sha256 hashed value of the prekey's pubkey, signed with the prekey's private key.

Reviewer 2: Clients MUST verify the `prekey_sig` before accepting this event. 

This allows anyone out there to copy the `prekey_sig` string and resign it under their own main nostr keys. Shouldn't the signature be a hash of `(nostr.pubkey || prekey.pubkey)` to avoid the shenanigans of just reusing somebody else's key?

Reviewer 2: I don't know. As it is today, one can just copy any other user's prekey tag and it will be valid. They won't have the private key so maybe they can't do anything with it, but there might be a social attack somewhere. The event doesn't prove the prekey is linked with the main key.

Author: True. that's a good point. I was thinking validation of the event + validation of the prekey signature would be enough but you're right, they aren't technically linked and it's easy to link them. 

I don't think it's strictly necessary given how we do the multiple pairs of DH calculations in the initial key exchange (which does require private key signatures from both the prekey and the identity key) to derive the initial root key but it certainly wouldn't hurt.

```js
const privKey = schnorr.utils.randomPrivateKey();
const pubKey = bytesToHex(schnorr.getPublicKey(privKey));

const prekeySig = bytesToHex(
  schnorr.sign(bytesToHex(sha256(utf8Encoder.encode(pubKey)), privKey))
);

const prekeyTag = ["prekey_sig", prekeySig];
```

## Known trade-offs & open questions

> 1. Messages are decrypted and stored on each device/client pairing. This means that there is no way to load and decrypt historic messages directly from relays on a different client or device. However, you can create backups of your decrypted conversations that could be loaded into another device (this is beyond the scope of this NIP).

Author: No, in most cases that I've seen there is no historic conversation syncing via the protocol. With some of them there is a way to download/backup chat history and then load that into a new client (Signal does this) but it's not syncing conversations between devices ever.

One thought I had about this was that if Blossom becomes something then it would be a way that we could sync this chat data but I think that's still too early to tell...

> 1. Messages are decrypted and stored on each device/client pairing. This means that there is no way to load and decrypt historic messages directly from relays on a different client or device. However, you can create backups of your decrypted conversations that could be loaded into another device (this is beyond the scope of this NIP).

Reviewer 3: https://conversations.im/ suggests "If you are installing Conversations on a new device or catching up after being offline for a while, Conversations will use [XEP-0313: Message Archive Management](https://xmpp.org/extensions/xep-0313.html) to fetch the message history from your server.". Do they mean that it is a new device with the same private key loaded from an old device?

> 1. Messages are decrypted and stored on each device/client pairing. This means that there is no way to load and decrypt historic messages directly from relays on a different client or device. However, you can create backups of your decrypted conversations that could be loaded into another device (this is beyond the scope of this NIP).

Reviewer 4: Signal does not address the issue. Signal can't download historical messages and doesn't have sync (besides a very trivial one, phone-to-desktop-web that relies on phone-to-web pairing and LAN webservers)

> 1. Messages are decrypted and stored on each device/client pairing. This means that there is no way to load and decrypt historic messages directly from relays on a different client or device. However, you can create backups of your decrypted conversations that could be loaded into another device (this is beyond the scope of this NIP).

Author: > Signal does not address the issue. Signal can't download historical messages and doesn't have sync (besides a very trivial one, phone-to-desktop-web that relies on phone-to-web pairing and LAN webservers)

That's partially true. They don't handle syncing but they do have a mechanism to back up the history and then load that file into a new device (done via bluetooth) https://support.signal.org/hc/en-us/articles/360007059752-Backup-and-Restore-Messages

@AndySchroder No idea. I think we have to approach the syncing question from first principles based on how Nostr works instead of just trying to copy whatever XMPP is doing.
